Generative AI for executives:

For us and many executives we’ve spoken to recently, entering one prompt into ChatGPT, developed by OpenAI, was all it took to see the power of generative AI. In the first five days of its release, more than a million users logged into the platform to experience it for themselves. OpenAI’s servers can barely keep up with demand, regularly flashing a message that users need to return later when server capacity frees up.

Products like ChatGPT and GitHub Copilot, as well as the underlying AI models that power such systems (Stable Diffusion, DALL·E 2, GPT-3, to name a few), are taking technology into realms once thought to be reserved for humans. With generative AI, computers can now arguably exhibit creativity. They can produce original content in response to queries, drawing from data they’ve ingested and interactions with users. They can develop blogs, sketch package designs, write computer code, or even theorize on the reason for a production error.

This latest class of generative AI systems has emerged from foundation models—large-scale, deep learning models trained on massive, broad, unstructured data sets (such as text and images) that cover many topics. Developers can adapt the models for a wide range of use cases, with little fine-tuning required for each task. For example, GPT-3.5, the foundation model underlying ChatGPT, has also been used to translate text, and scientists used an earlier version of GPT to create novel protein sequences. In this way, the power of these capabilities is accessible to all, including developers who lack specialized machine learning skills and, in some cases, people with no technical background. Using foundation models can also reduce the time for developing new AI applications to a level rarely possible before.

Generative AI promises to make 2023 one of the most exciting years yet for AI. But as with every new technology, business leaders must proceed with eyes wide open, because the technology today presents many ethical and practical challenges.


Pushing further into human realms
More than a decade ago, we wrote an article in which we sorted economic activity into three buckets—production, transactions, and interactions—and examined the extent to which technology had made inroads into each. Machines and factory technologies transformed production by augmenting and automating human labor during the Industrial Revolution more than 100 years ago, and AI has further amped up efficiencies on the manufacturing floor. Transactions have undergone many technological iterations over approximately the same time frame, including most recently digitization and, frequently, automation.

Until recently, interaction labor, such as customer service, has experienced the least mature technological interventions. Generative AI is set to change that by undertaking interaction labor in a way that approximates human behavior closely and, in some cases, imperceptibly. That’s not to say these tools are intended to work without human input and intervention. In many cases, they are most powerful in combination with humans, augmenting their capabilities and enabling them to get work done faster and better.

Generative AI is also pushing technology into a realm thought to be unique to the human mind: creativity. The technology leverages its inputs (the data it has ingested and a user prompt) and experiences (interactions with users that help it “learn” new information and what’s correct/incorrect) to generate entirely new content. While dinner table debates will rage for the foreseeable future on whether this truly equates to creativity, most would likely agree that these tools stand to unleash more creativity into the world by prompting humans with starter ideas.

Humans are good at analyzing things. Machines are even better. Machines can analyze a set of data and find patterns in it for a multitude of use cases, whether it’s fraud or spam detection, forecasting the ETA of your delivery or predicting which TikTok video to show you next. They are getting smarter at these tasks. This is called “Analytical AI,” or traditional AI. 

But humans are not only good at analyzing things—we are also good at creating. We write poetry, design products, make games and crank out code. Up until recently, machines had no chance of competing with humans at creative work—they were relegated to analysis and rote cognitive labor. But machines are just starting to get good at creating sensical and beautiful things. This new category is called “Generative AI,” meaning the machine is generating something new rather than analyzing something that already exists. 

Generative AI is well on the way to becoming not just faster and cheaper, but better in some cases than what humans create by hand. Every industry that requires humans to create original work—from social media to gaming, advertising to architecture, coding to graphic design, product design to law, marketing to sales—is up for reinvention. Certain functions may be completely replaced by generative AI, while others are more likely to thrive from a tight iterative creative cycle between human and machine—but generative AI should unlock better, faster and cheaper creation across a wide range of end markets. The dream is that generative AI brings the marginal cost of creation and knowledge work down towards zero, generating vast labor productivity and economic value—and commensurate market cap.

The fields that generative AI addresses—knowledge work and creative work—comprise billions of workers. Generative AI can make these workers at least 10% more efficient and/or creative: they become not only faster and more efficient, but more capable than before. Therefore, Generative AI has the potential to generate trillions of dollars of economic value.

Why Now? 
Generative AI has the same “why now” as AI more broadly: better models, more data, more compute. The category is changing faster than we can capture, but it’s worth recounting recent history in broad strokes to put the current moment in context. 

Wave 1: Small models reign supreme (Pre-2015) 5+ years ago, small models are considered “state of the art” for understanding language. These small models excel at analytical tasks and become deployed for jobs from delivery time prediction to fraud classification. However, they are not expressive enough for general-purpose generative tasks. Generating human-level writing or code remains a pipe dream. 

Wave 2: The race to scale (2015-Today) A landmark paper by Google Research (Attention is All You Need) describes a new neural network architecture for natural language understanding called transformers that can generate superior quality language models while being more parallelizable and requiring significantly less time to train. These models are few-shot learners and can be customized to specific domains relatively easily.


AS AI MODELS HAVE GOTTEN PROGRESSIVELY LARGER THEY HAVE BEGUN TO SURPASS MAJOR HUMAN PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS. SOURCES: © THE ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER LIMITED, LONDON, JUNE 11TH 2022. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED; SCIENCE.ORG/CONTENT/ARTICLE/COMPUTERS-ACE-IQ-TESTS-STILL-MAKE-DUMB-MISTAKES-CAN-DIFFERENT-TESTS-HELP
Sure enough, as the models get bigger and bigger, they begin to deliver human-level, and then superhuman results. Between 2015 and 2020, the compute used to train these models increases by 6 orders of magnitude and their results surpass human performance benchmarks in handwriting, speech and image recognition, reading comprehension and language understanding. OpenAI’s GPT-3 stands out: the model’s performance is a giant leap over GPT-2 and delivers tantalizing Twitter demos on tasks from code generation to snarky joke writing.  

Despite all the fundamental research progress, these models are not widespread. They are large and difficult to run (requiring GPU orchestration), not broadly accessible (unavailable or closed beta only), and expensive to use as a cloud service. Despite these limitations, the earliest Generative AI applications begin to enter the fray.  

Wave 3: Better, faster, cheaper (2022+) Compute gets cheaper. New techniques, like diffusion models, shrink down the costs required to train and run inference. The research community continues to develop better algorithms and larger models. Developer access expands from closed beta to open beta, or in some cases, open source.

For developers who had been starved of access to LLMs, the floodgates are now open for exploration and application development. Applications begin to bloom.


ILLUSTRATION GENERATED WITH MIDJOURNEY
Wave 4: Killer apps emerge (Now) With the platform layer solidifying, models continuing to get better/faster/cheaper, and model access trending to free and open source, the application layer is ripe for an explosion of creativity.

Just as mobile unleashed new types of applications through new capabilities like GPS, cameras and on-the-go connectivity, we expect these large models to motivate a new wave of generative AI applications. And just as the inflection point of mobile created a market opening for a handful of killer apps a decade ago, we expect killer apps to emerge for Generative AI. The race is on.

Market Landscape 
Below is a schematic that describes the platform layer that will power each category and the potential types of applications that will be built on top.

Sure enough, as the models get bigger and bigger, they begin to deliver human-level, and then superhuman results.

Just as mobile unleashed new types of applications through new capabilities like GPS, cameras and on-the-go connectivity, we expect these large models to motivate a new wave of generative AI applications.


Models

Text is the most advanced domain. However, natural language is hard to get right, and quality matters. Today, the models are decently good at generic short/medium-form writing (but even so, they are typically used for iteration or first drafts). Over time, as the models get better, we should expect to see higher quality outputs, longer-form content, and better vertical-specific tuning.
Code generation is likely to have a big impact on developer productivity in the near term as shown by GitHub CoPilot. It will also make the creative use of code more accessible to non developers.
Images are a more recent phenomenon, but they have gone viral: it’s much more fun to share generated images on Twitter than text! We are seeing the advent of image models with different aesthetic styles, and different techniques for editing and modifying generated images.
Speech synthesis has been around for a while (hello Siri!) but consumer and enterprise applications are just getting good. For high-end applications like film and podcasts the bar is quite high for one-shot human quality speech that doesn’t sound mechanical. But just like with images, today’s models provide a starting point for further refinement or final output for utilitarian applications.
Video and 3D models are coming up the curve quickly. People are excited about these models’ potential to unlock large creative markets like cinema, gaming, VR, architecture and physical product design. The research orgs are releasing foundational 3D and video models as we speak. 
Other domains: There is fundamental model R&D happening in many fields, from audio and music to biology and chemistry (generative proteins and molecules, anyone?).  
The below chart illustrates a timeline for how we might expect to see fundamental models progress and the associated applications that become possible. 2025 and beyond is just a guess.


Applications
Here are some of the applications we are excited about. There are far more than we have captured on this page, and we are enthralled by the creative applications that founders and developers are dreaming up. 

Copywriting: The growing need for personalized web and email content to fuel sales and marketing strategies as well as customer support are perfect applications for language models. The short form and stylized nature of the verbiage combined with the time and cost pressures on these teams should drive demand for automated and augmented solutions.
Vertical specific writing assistants: Most writing assistants today are horizontal; we believe there is an opportunity to build much better generative applications for specific end markets, from legal contract writing to screenwriting. Product differentiation here is in the fine-tuning of the models and UX patterns for particular workflows. 
Code generation: Current applications turbocharge developers and make them much more productive: GitHub Copilot is now generating nearly 40% of code in the projects where it is installed. But the even bigger opportunity may be opening up access to coding for consumers. Learning to prompt may become the ultimate high-level programming language.
Art generation: The entire world of art history and pop cultures is now encoded in these large models, allowing anyone to explore themes and styles at will that previously would have taken a lifetime to master.
Gaming: The dream is using natural language to create complex scenes or models that are riggable; that end state is probably a long way off, but there are more immediate options that are more actionable in the near term such as generating textures and skybox art.  
Media/Advertising: Imagine the potential to automate agency work and optimize ad copy and creative on the fly for consumers. Great opportunities here for multi-modal generation that pairs sell messages with complementary visuals.
Design: Prototyping digital and physical products is a labor-intensive and iterative process. High-fidelity renderings from rough sketches and prompts are already a reality. As 3-D models become available the generative design process will extend up through manufacturing and production—text to object. Your next iPhone app or sneakers may be designed by a machine.
Social media and digital communities: Are there new ways of expressing ourselves using generative tools? New applications like Midjourney are creating new social experiences as consumers learn to create in public.

ILLUSTRATION GENERATED WITH MIDJOURNEY
Anatomy of a Generative AI Application 
What will a generative AI application look like? Here are some predictions.  

Intelligence and model fine-tuning 
Generative AI apps are built on top of large models like GPT-3 or Stable Diffusion. As these applications get more user data, they can fine-tune their models to: 1) improve model quality/performance for their specific problem space and; 2) decrease model size/costs.  

We can think of Generative AI apps as a UI layer and “little brain” that sits on top of the “big brain” that is the large general-purpose models.  

Form Factor 
Today, Generative AI apps largely exist as plugins in existing software ecosystems. Code completions happen in your IDE; image generations happen in Figma or Photoshop; even Discord bots are the vessel to inject generative AI into digital/social communities.  

There are also a smaller number of standalone Generative AI web apps, such as Jasper and Copy.ai for copywriting, Runway for video editing, and Mem for note taking.  

A plugin may be an effective wedge into bootstrapping your own application, and it may be a savvy way to surmount the chicken-and-egg problem of user data and model quality (you need distribution to get enough usage to improve your models; you need good models to attract users). We have seen this distribution strategy pay off in other market categories, like consumer/social.

Paradigm of Interaction 
Today, most Generative AI demos are “one-and-done”: you offer an input, the machine spits out an output, and you can keep it or throw it away and try again. Increasingly, the models are becoming more iterative, where you can work with the outputs to modify, finesse, uplevel and generate variations.  

Today, Generative AI outputs are being used as prototypes or first drafts. Applications are great at spitting out multiple different ideas to get the creative process going (e.g. different options for a logo or architectural design), and they are great at suggesting first drafts that need to be finessed by a user to reach the final state (e.g. blog posts or code autocompletions). As the models get smarter, partially off the back of user data, we should expect these drafts to get better and better and better, until they are good enough to use as the final product.  

Sustained Category Leadership
The best Generative AI companies can generate a sustainable competitive advantage by executing relentlessly on the flywheel between user engagement/data and model performance. To win, teams have to get this flywheel going by 1) having exceptional user engagement → 2) turning more user engagement into better model performance (prompt improvements, model fine-tuning, user choices as labeled training data) → 3) using great model performance to drive more user growth and engagement. They will likely go into specific problem spaces (e.g., code, design, gaming) rather than trying to be everything to everyone. They will likely first integrate deeply into applications for leverage and distribution and later attempt to replace the incumbent applications with AI-native workflows. It will take time to build these applications the right way to accumulate users and data, but we believe the best ones will be durable and have a chance to become massive. 

Hurdles and Risks 
Despite Generative AI’s potential, there are plenty of kinks around business models and technology to iron out. Questions over important issues like copyright, trust & safety and costs are far from resolved.

Eyes Wide Open
Generative AI is still very early. The platform layer is just getting good, and the application space has barely gotten going. 

To be clear, we don’t need large language models to write a Tolstoy novel to make good use of Generative AI. These models are good enough today to write first drafts of blog posts and generate prototypes of logos and product interfaces. There is a wealth of value creation that will happen in the near-to-medium-term.

This first wave of Generative AI applications resembles the mobile application landscape when the iPhone first came out—somewhat gimmicky and thin, with unclear competitive differentiation and business models. However, some of these applications provide an interesting glimpse into what the future may hold. Once you see a machine produce complex functioning code or brilliant images, it’s hard to imagine a future where machines don’t play a fundamental role in how we work and create. 

If we allow ourselves to dream multiple decades out, then it’s easy to imagine a future where Generative AI is deeply embedded in how we work, create and play: memos that write themselves; 3D print anything you can imagine; go from text to Pixar film; Roblox-like gaming experiences that generate rich worlds as quickly as we can dream them up. While these experiences may seem like science fiction today, the rate of progress is incredibly high—we have gone from narrow language models to code auto-complete in several years—and if we continue along this rate of change and follow a “Large Model Moore’s Law,” then these far-fetched scenarios may just enter the realm of the possible.

‘ ****************************

Generative AI and other foundation models are changing the AI game, taking assistive technology to a new level, reducing application development time, and bringing powerful capabilities to nontechnical users.

DOWNLOADS

Article (5 pages)
MOST POPULAR INSIGHTS
1. What is generative AI?
2. The future of commodity trading
3. Workplace rituals: Recapturing the power of what we’ve lost
4. Performance through people: Transforming human capital into competitive advantage
5. A CEO’s guide to the metaverse
In the spirit of this article’s topic, we asked ChatGPT—a generative AI language model that can create original content in response to a user prompt—how it would set the context. Our prompt to the system:
Write the opening paragraph for an article about how transformative generative AI will be for business, in the style of McKinsey & Company.
ChatGPT’s response:
The rise of generative AI has the potential to be a major game-changer for businesses. This technology, which allows for the creation of original content by learning from existing data, has the power to revolutionize industries and transform the way companies operate. By enabling the automation of many tasks that were previously done by humans, generative AI has the potential to increase efficiency and productivity, reduce costs, and open up new opportunities for growth. As such, businesses that are able to effectively leverage the technology are likely to gain a significant competitive advantage.
Not perfect but overwhelmingly impressive.
For us and many executives we’ve spoken to recently, entering one prompt into ChatGPT, developed by OpenAI, was all it took to see the power of generative AI. In the first five days of its release, more than a million users logged into the platform to experience it for themselves. OpenAI’s servers can barely keep up with demand, regularly flashing a message that users need to return later when server capacity frees up.
Products like ChatGPT and GitHub Copilot, as well as the underlying AI models that power such systems (Stable Diffusion, DALL·E 2, GPT-3, to name a few), are taking technology into realms once thought to be reserved for humans. With generative AI, computers can now arguably exhibit creativity. They can produce original content in response to queries, drawing from data they’ve ingested and interactions with users. They can develop blogs, sketch package designs, write computer code, or even theorize on the reason for a production error.
This latest class of generative AI systems has emerged from foundation models—large-scale, deep learning models trained on massive, broad, unstructured data sets (such as text and images) that cover many topics. Developers can adapt the models for a wide range of use cases, with little fine-tuning required for each task. For example, GPT-3.5, the foundation model underlying ChatGPT, has also been used to translate text, and scientists used an earlier version of GPT to create novel protein sequences. In this way, the power of these capabilities is accessible to all, including developers who lack specialized machine learning skills and, in some cases, people with no technical background. Using foundation models can also reduce the time for developing new AI applications to a level rarely possible before.
Generative AI promises to make 2023 one of the most exciting years yet for AI. But as with every new technology, business leaders must proceed with eyes wide open, because the technology today presents many ethical and practical challenges.
Would you like to learn more about QuantumBlack, AI by McKinsey?
Pushing further into human realms
More than a decade ago, we wrote an article in which we sorted economic activity into three buckets—production, transactions, and interactions—and examined the extent to which technology had made inroads into each. Machines and factory technologies transformed production by augmenting and automating human labor during the Industrial Revolution more than 100 years ago, and AI has further amped up efficiencies on the manufacturing floor. Transactions have undergone many technological iterations over approximately the same time frame, including most recently digitization and, frequently, automation.
Until recently, interaction labor, such as customer service, has experienced the least mature technological interventions. Generative AI is set to change that by undertaking interaction labor in a way that approximates human behavior closely and, in some cases, imperceptibly. That’s not to say these tools are intended to work without human input and intervention. In many cases, they are most powerful in combination with humans, augmenting their capabilities and enabling them to get work done faster and better.
Generative AI is also pushing technology into a realm thought to be unique to the human mind: creativity. The technology leverages its inputs (the data it has ingested and a user prompt) and experiences (interactions with users that help it “learn” new information and what’s correct/incorrect) to generate entirely new content. While dinner table debates will rage for the foreseeable future on whether this truly equates to creativity, most would likely agree that these tools stand to unleash more creativity into the world by prompting humans with starter ideas.
Business uses abound
These models are in the early days of scaling, but we’ve started seeing the first batch of applications across functions, including the following (exhibit):
* Marketing and sales—crafting personalized marketing, social media, and technical sales content (including text, images, and video); creating assistants aligned to specific businesses, such as retail
* Operations—generating task lists for efficient execution of a given activity
* IT/engineering—writing, documenting, and reviewing code
* Risk and legal—answering complex questions, pulling from vast amounts of legal documentation, and drafting and reviewing annual reports
* R&D—accelerating drug discovery through better understanding of diseases and discovery of chemical structures
Exhibit
￼
We strive to provide individuals with disabilities equal access to our website. If you would like information about this content we will be happy to work with you. Please email us at: McKinsey_Website_Accessibility@mckinsey.com
Excitement is warranted, but caution is required
The awe-inspiring results of generative AI might make it seem like a ready-set-go technology, but that’s not the case. Its nascency requires executives to proceed with an abundance of caution. Technologists are still working out the kinks, and plenty of practical and ethical issues remain open. Here are just a few:
* Like humans, generative AI can be wrong. ChatGPT, for example, sometimes “hallucinates,” meaning it confidently generates entirely inaccurate information in response to a user question and has no built-in mechanism to signal this to the user or challenge the result. For example, we have observed instances when the tool was asked to create a short bio and it generated several incorrect facts for the person, such as listing the wrong educational institution.
* Filters are not yet effective enough to catch inappropriate content. Users of an image-generating application that can create avatars from a person’s photo received avatar options from the system that portrayed them nude, even though they had input appropriate photos of themselves.
* Systemic biases still need to be addressed. These systems draw from massive amounts of data that might include unwanted biases.
* Individual company norms and values aren’t reflected. Companies will need to adapt the technology to incorporate their culture and values, an exercise that requires technical expertise and computing power beyond what some companies may have ready access to.
* Intellectual-property questions are up for debate. When a generative AI model brings forward a new product design or idea based on a user prompt, who can lay claim to it? What happens when it plagiarizes a source based on its training data?
Initial steps for executives
In companies considering generative AI, executives will want to quickly identify the parts of their business where the technology could have the most immediate impact and implement a mechanism to monitor it, given that it is expected to evolve quickly. A no-regrets move is to assemble a cross-functional team, including data science practitioners, legal experts, and functional business leaders, to think through basic questions, such as these:
* Where might the technology aid or disrupt our industry and/or our business’s value chain?
* What are our policies and posture? For example, are we watchfully waiting to see how the technology evolves, investing in pilots, or looking to build a new business? Should the posture vary across areas of the business?
* Given the limitations of the models, what are our criteria for selecting use cases to target?
* How do we pursue building an effective ecosystem of partners, communities, and platforms?
* What legal and community standards should these models adhere to so we can maintain trust with our stakeholders?
Meanwhile, it’s essential to encourage thoughtful innovation across the organization, standing up guardrails along with sandboxed environments for experimentation, many of which are readily available via the cloud, with more likely on the horizon.

The innovations that generative AI could ignite for businesses of all sizes and levels of technological proficiency are truly exciting. However, executives will want to remain acutely aware of the risks that exist at this early stage of the technology’s development.

